# IPFS

IPFS is by far the most widely used "decentralized storage" solution there is, being used (provably and successfully!) to host censorship resistant media, pirated textbooks, Wikipedia archives, etc.

Boasting over 280k unique nodes "pinning" over a billion files, IPFS is *not* a blockchain project! It's simply a pure P2P decentralized storage solution. 

IPFS, in essence, mirrors torrenting in the sense that multiple nodes host copies of the same file, and files are retrieved by downloading fragments from those nodes. _Pinning_ here is their equivalent operation to _seeding_.

However, IPFS has some key differences:
- Files are chunked similarly to the piece system in BitTorrent, but these chunks build up a Merkle DAG
- This Merkle DAG is used for verification purposes and also for distribution purposes — when files are retrieved from providers, they follow this Merkle DAG
- Files are content-addressable with a Content Identifier (CID) in a cleaner manner compared to torrent magnet links

At the same time, IPFS faces the exact same issue key issue that BitTorrenting does which : persistence is dependent on how many nodes are helping to pin your file, so if you cease to pin your file and there are no other nodes pinning it, the file is lost to the aether!
## Caches, Gateways and Pinning Services

Using an IPFS client to download files would lead to it being cached and pinned automatically, and it will only be unpinned once the cache gets too full and old files get cleared out by their garbage collection system.

However, most people will not run their own IPFS node to gain access to a client in order to download files. Instead, the primary means of accessing IPFS files is usually through an IPFS gateway (similar to how you don't run an ETH node to interact with wallets, you run operations through an Infura gateway via Metamask), such as `ipfs.io` or `cloudflare.ipfs.com`. This makes it easier for people to interact with the IPFS network through a traditional web browser or by making conventional HTTP requests, but this means reliance on a centralized service to provide the gateway and "leeching" like behaviour in play.

In order to facilitate distributed pinning of files across multiple nodes, most users will then opt for a pinning service such as [Pinata](https://pinata.cloud), who run multiple IPFS nodes which will pin your files for you. The alternative to free or paid pinning services (and IPFS altogether, if considered on its own)... is Filecoin!
# Filecoin

(Information accurate as of 2024/07/10)

Filecoin is a token that flew to an ATH of $237.24 at the peak of the 2021 bull run and now sits about 98.37% down from that ATH at $3.90. This hype was mostly driven in tandem with the NFT bubble of the time as Filecoin was OpenSea's solution to NFT metadata and content storage, facilitated via their product [NFT.storage](https://nft.storage/). 

Filecoin itself is [recognised by the IPFS devs](https://docs.ipfs.tech/concepts/persistence/#long-term-storage) and is treated as a solution that end-users may consider for persistent file storage in a decentralized manner.
## The Filecoin Mainnet 

Filecoin has its associated utility token, $FIL, which is being emitted over the network's lifetime and involved in the proof systems in place. Nodes which verify blocks produced on the network also operate as storage providers, which store data in _sectors_, the basic unit of storage on the network, and produce proofs that make up the on-chain blocks.
### The Tipset-Chain

The Filecoin blockchain is built on what they call _tipsets_, which are bundles of blocks which get appended in one go. In each epoch, multiple block producers may be elected to create a block, so this just gets added as one whole tipset. 

Some advantages of this include:
- Increased network efficiency and throughput
- Incentivization for all block produces to produce blocks rather than a centralized subset
- All validated block producers will receive rewards
### Proof Systems

Recalling that the point of Filecoin is to provide a storage solution, there has to be systems in place to prove that you are, in fact, providing storage and not modifying the stored content. Filecoin thus has two systems in place to facilitate this _proof of storage_:
- Proof of Replication, verifying that a copy of the file has actually been made
- Proof of Spacetime, verifying that the file is still being stored
#### Proof of Replication
Data is "sealed" by a storage provider, and the sealing process produces a hash which takes into account the data content, the storage provider's details and the sealing timestamp. This hash is then compressed where a Merkle proof and tree are generated, then submitted to the network, after which it can be verified by other nodes by checking out the Merkle proof.
#### Proof of Spacetime
This is to prove that data which has been sealed continues to exist on the sector it has been stored on. There are two proofs of spacetime, one requested when a storage provider is elected to mine new blocks and one requested basically daily.

The former is called a "Winning Proof of Spacetime", where a storage provider that has been elected to mine a block will have a piece of data they are storing randomly selected, in which they have to create a proof of its continued existence in a similar manner to the above Proof of Replication. On successful verification, the storage provider is then rewarded with a block reward.

For the daily verification, this is the "Window Proof of Spacetime", in which the miner has to produce a SNARK-compressed proof to submit to the chain of a whole partition comprising 2349 sectors in one go within a deadline of 30 minutes from the time the proof is requested. This check can happen once _within 24 hours_ of each other, with the deadlines being imposed every 30 minutes. This means if a node pledges 48 sectors, then every half hour one of these sectors will be subject to a proof request.

Similar to in a Proof of Stake system, the penalty for failing a Window Proof of Spacetime is the slashing of the node's collateral and a reduction in their Storage Power, a metric used in the consensus algorithm which determines your voting power in electing leaders and the value that your proof verifications hold when verifying blocks as a miner.

## Storing Files with Filecoin

Data persistence and storage is achieved through the establishment of _deals_, where clients choose storage providers with preferential prices for storage to store their data, after which the deal would be published on-chain and maintained through the aforementioned proof systems in place.

Data retrieval then involves an "unsealing process", in which another fee is paid out in $FIL to request the storage providers to retrieve the data and send it back to you, which can take a few hours.

These deals must have a minimum duration of 180 days, and maximum duration of 540 days.

This is... a relatively simple process, but one that is slow as hell ([according to their own docs!](https://docs.filecoin.io/networks/mainnet/network-performance)). 
- The deal proposal to acceptance process to be reflected on chain takes roughly 5 to 10 minutes for... a 1Mb file!?
- The sealing process when your data is uploaded to a storage provider can take up to 1.5 hours for a 32Gb sector.
- The unsealing process when you retrieve your data can take up to 3 hours for a 32Gb sector.
## How Much Storage Is There On Filecoin?

Supposedly, as of 2024/07/10, Filecoin has a raw byte storage capacity of... **5.76 EiB**? Down from an ATH of **17 EiB** in Q2'22??? (EiB is an Exbibyte, which is around a million Terabytes.) And of this raw storage capacity, there's 1.6 EiB worth of active deals on the network. I find this extremely hard to believe as Google stores maybe ten to fifteen exabytes (which in physicist terms, is approximately an exbibyte) of data, so how is Filecoin even matching a sizable fraction of that?

This data comes from [Starboard Ventures](https://dashboard.starboard.ventures/dashboard) which should be pulling it on-chain, so... uhm... make it make sense, man. There are less than 2.5k active miners on the network now, a figure that has been steadily decreasing since 2022, so the figures here are somewhat hard to believe.
## Wait, I Thought We Were Talking About IPFS?

If you haven't noticed already, the spec described here as absolutely nothing to do with IPFS! Filecoin is its own decentralized storage solution which can then work in tandem with IPFS — the idea is for an IPFS pinning service to also store the data that is being pinned on Filecoin so that the data will persist in the long term. 

This is the mechanism in which [web3.storage](https://web3.storage), [Fleek](https://fleek.co/storage) and [nft.storage](https://nft.storage) operate: Filecoin is used as an archiving service to back up your pinned IPFS files, which helps to alleviate the concern of the centralized pinning service going down as your files will still exist on Filecoin. 

(Snide remark: obviously with the way that these centralized entities operate, assuming they perform the deal establishment on your behalf on Filecoin, if they were to go down or deny access to your pinned files, you're basically screwed if you don't have the required details from the original deal to unseal and retrieve the data yourself. Oops!)

## Huh, So Does Filecoin Enable Decentralized IPFS Pinning?

No! Your IPFS pinning services are not actually being paid with $FIL or anything and **Filecoin isn't actually an incentive layer for IPFS pinning**. Filecoin is straight up its own decentralized storage solution that is often proposed as a backbone for long-term data persistence for IPFS pinning services. **Filecoin does not actively serve your data in a readily retrievable manner and is more like an offshore data storage vault.** Even though their docs claim that it can be used as a caching layer for IPFS, it's just _so damn slow_.

And this is more or less why Filecoin _doesn't actually have that much mainstream usage_, as the Filecoin part is not exactly entirely essential to enable the content serving and retrieval on IPFS, which is the layer that we are actually operating on.

A product that actually provides verifiable smart-contract oriented IPFS pinning system where there exists an incentive token used to pay out those participating in pinning would be [Storj](https://storj.dev/dcs/api/storj-ipfs-pinning) (which itself is a decentralized cloud storage network), which currently has a native IPFS pinning service **actively serving data** from decentralized storage nodes as described currently in beta.
## TL;DR

Filecoin can best be described as a decentralized cold storage solution (with a max storage time of a measly 540 days) that is not meant for high speed data storage and retrieval and in no way is it "an incentive layer for IPFS" or an IPFS pinning solution, so do not be fooled by all the talk of how it an IPFS is some perfect marriage. 

As for the efficacy of Filecoin as a cold storage solution, it's extremely hard to gauge as when discussing mainstream usage of Filecoin as a service, it's usually just a side thing that IPFS pinning service providers let you do as sort of a "backup" and there aren't really storage onramps for purely uploading to IPFS. There just aren't any user friendly onramps that operate as a Dropbox like service for Filecoin (not that it would be particularly accessible or readily usable either due to the slow data unsealing and retrieval process).